General Usage Notes
-------------------

Most of the codes in the DLPUTILS package have a similar usage syntax on the command line - at the
simplest level, the names of DL_POLY HIStory and OUTput files are the only required arguments. 
For example:

user@pc:~> rdf mysystem.HISu mysystem.OUT

Note that the extension of the HIStory file *is* important - passing a default-named HISTORY file
makes it difficult to detect whether the file is formatted or unformatted. For this reason, all
the DLPUTILS assume that a trajectory with the extension '.HISu' is unformatted, while one with
'.HISf' is formatted. The extension of the OUTput file is not important. It is not necessary to
specify the number of molecule types (species) defined in the system, number of atoms in 
molecules, etc., since this is read from the supplied OUTput file. The codes are designed to read
DL_POLY v2 HIStory and OUTput files, but making them compatible for DL_POLY v3 (and beyond)
should not be a difficult task (modify dlprw as necessary).

Since the first two arguments are mandatory, running any of the codes with no arguments will
print out usage information, including a list of available command-line switches which
control various relevant parameters in the codes.

In most cases one of several output files is generated, rather than results being written to screen.
The names of these files is always based on the name of the HIStory file, but only if the filename
has an extension (it doesn't matter what the extension is). This is removed and replaced by a
new, descriptive extension. For example, the 'rdf' program produces files called '.rdfNM', where
'N' and 'M' are the identifying species numbers. So, the above example will produce output files 
called 'mysystem.rdf11', 'mysystem.rdf12', etc., depending on the number of species in the system.

Included Codes (and their intended function)
--------------------------------------------

Codes marked [OLD] were useful once, but haven't been updated/used in a long time. Investigate them
thoroughly before use! Similarly, codes marked [UNTESTED] are just that. Either they are in the
process of being written, or have never fully been used/tested and so are potentially unfit for
purpose. They might offer a good basis for something, though.

[Core Modules]
dlprw		Read/write routines for DL_POLY history, output, and config files
fieldread	Library to read DL_POLY FIELD files
parse		Library to read and parse text files
utility		Various utility functions used by all codes, e.g. minimum image

[HIStory File Manipulation]
addheader	Copy header from history file onto another which doesn't have one
cagecor2	Calculate cage correlation functions
catdlp		Concatenate one or more history files together
chunkdlp	
dlp2dlp		Convert between formatted and unformatted history files
dlp2dlpflipz	[OLD] As 'dlp2dlp', but flipping z-coordinates in the process
dlp2dlpshift	[OLD] As 'dlp2dlp', but shifting coordinates in the process
dlp2xyzf	Convert history file to 7-column XYZ+forces file
dlpreorder	[OLD] Reorder the species in a history file
dlpsize		Determine usable size (i.e. number of readable frames) in history file
filterdlp	Filter frames from a HISTORY file
his2config	Retrieve frame(s) from a history file, writing CONFIG files in the process
his2xyzs	Dump XYZ files of frames in supplied HISTORY file
probedlp	Investigate history file - useful for pinning down bad appends, restarts etc.

[Distribution Functions]
cdf		Calculate a cylindrical distribution function of molecules about an axis (e.g. a pore centre)
dahist		Calculate distance (RDF) and angle map between specific atoms of species
dist2		Calculate RDFs over subset of molecules (i.e. restricted by proximity, coordinates etc.)
moldist		Calculate distance histogram between specific atom of one species and the COM of another
pdens		Calculate probability densities (spatial distribution functions or SDFs)
pdensint	Integrate output from 'pdens'
pdensmirror	Mirror (i.e. average) output from 'pdens' along x, y, or z
pdenstrim	Write partial grid from existing output from 'pdens'
rdf_aa		Calculate partial RDFs between atom pairs in the same species
rdf_aa_inter	Calcualte partial RDFs between atom pairs in different species
rdf		Calculate RDFs between molecular species centres-of-mass
rdf_ss		Calculate site-site RDFs
rdfsum		[OLD] Take averages of one or more RDF outputs
sq		Calculate neutron-weighted static structure factors
surfacify	Calculate density 'surface' of atoms throughout box
totalgr		[UNTESTED] Calculate total, neutron-weighted g(r) 
zangle		Calculate angles between X and Y planes of molecules (from an axis definition)
zdens		Calculate z-density profiles of species in the system

[Geometry]
angle		Calculate angle between same vector on different molecules of a species
avgconfig	Determine the averaged coordinates over a series of trajectory frames
cryscomp	Compare a reference structure (e.g. a crystal) with a HISTORY trajectory
dlpgeom		Determine average geometric criteria (i.e. bonds, angles, torsions) from a history or CONFIG
intertorsion	Calculate torsion histogram for torsion angle defined over the atoms of two species
intratorsion	Calculate torsion histogram for torsion angle defined in one species
intratorsion2	Calculate torsion-torsion correlation map for two intramolecular torsions on one species
pairs2		Outputs coordinates of pairs of molecules from a given species which are within some distance of each other

[Correlation Functions]
acfcat		Concatenate two input files for the 'acf' program
acf		Calculate dipole autocorrelation functions
acfprep		Prepare an 'acf' input file from a DL_POLY history file
acfsum		Sum the results of one or more 'acf' calculations
cluster		Calculate 'cluster' sizes based on COM of species
dacf		Calculate the system dipole autocorrelation function
msd[2]		Calculate MSD
msdxyz		Calculate MSD, outputting individual XYZ components
vac[2]		Calculate velocity autocorrelation function

[Other Properties]
bident2anal	Analyse dump files written by bident
bident[234]	Analyse style of contacts between a bidentate central species and other species
cn		Calculate coordination numbers
counthb		Count the number and average geometry of specified close contacts (e.g. HB)
getcell		Retrieve cell information from history file
legendre	Calculate first and second-order Legendre polynomials of specified vector with a given surface
lifehb		Calculate the frame 'lifetime' of specified close contacts

[Misc Utils]
editconfig	Edit a CONFIG file, changing atom type names within it
gengg		Combine Lennard-Jones parameters for single atoms, outputting list for FIELD file
genlb		As 'gengg', but using Lorentz-Berthelot combination rules instead of sqr/sqr

[Specific Programs - Not for general use]
gammadist
glucanal
glucgeom
glucgeom_old
gluchbeach
gluchb
glucsphere

Program-Specific Usage Notes
----------------------------

bident(2,3,4)
----------------------------
Species 1 indicates the 'donor' species, which species 2 indicates the species with the 'bidentate' feature
(e.g. carboxylate group oxygens). The atoms i and j given for species 2 should correspond to the atoms
of the bidentate group. Note that it does not make sense to give two atoms that are not close, nor does it
make sense to give two atoms that are not rigidly positioned relative to each other (e.g. via a bond
angle).  The maxdist parameter indicates the largest distance interaction to consider between an atom of 
species 1 and either of the bidentate atoms on species 2.

Some sites on species 1 must also be defined, and which specify the subunits to consider in the calculation.
For instance, an O-H group on species could be defined. Needless to say, the two atoms must be bound and
local to each other.

pdens
----------------------------
The molecule type on which the probability density is to be centered must have a set of
axes defined for it, so that the rest of the molecules in the system can be rotated into
this local geometric frame, and the probability density formed. To do this, the program
requires that you provide two atoms which define the vector along which the x-axis lays,
and two atoms which lay on the y axis (the average position is taken, and the same atom
can be specified twice if necessary). The origin of the axis system is then taken to be
the average position of the two atoms given for the x axis, and the y axis is then assumed
to pass through this point and the centre of the two atoms provided for the y axis. The
z axis is then calculated from the cross product of these two vectors.

For example, with water you have only one option, really, and that is to use the two
hydrogen atoms to define the x vector, and the oxygen to define y. So, if your water
molecule atoms were arranged ‘H’, ‘O’, ‘H’, you would use the ‘-axis’ switch as follows:
 
–axis 1 1 3 2 2

rdf
----------------------------
Calculates basic radial distribution functions between species, using a default binwidth of 0.1 Angstroms.
The centre-of-mass RDFs between all species are calculated by default, but this can be overridden with the
-compair and -otherpair options (see below).

Available command-line options:
	-bin <width>	Set the bin width to use in all histograms
	-header <file>	Specify an alternative HISTORY file to use, from which header information is taken
	-frames <n>	Terminate calculation after reading a specific number of frames
	-nonorm		Turn off normalisation of the RDF to bulk number density of the species
	-zplus		Restrict calculation to molecules with z greater than that of the central one	
	-zminus		Restrict calculation to molecules with z smaller than that of the central one	
	-discard <n>	Skip a number of frames at the beginning of the trajectory
	-compair <sp> <i> <j>	Instead of using the centre-of-mass for the specified species, use the
			geometric average of the two atom indices supplied
	-otherpair <sp> <i> <j>   Instead of using the centre-of-mass (or compair atoms) for the position
			of the surrounding species, use the geometric average of the two atom indices supplied

sq
----------------------------
sq requires that a file called 'lengths.dat' *must* be present, and is used to provide
atom type name to element map information. This file is needed to enable the code to 
unambiguously distinguish which atoms correspond to which elements (something which is
not always obvious from the atom type names used in forcefields). The file also allows
atom type names to be mapped to a new, alternative name, or to combine several atom type
names into one single type name in the program's output.

The first line of the file should consist of a single integer specifying the number of 
lines of data to expect in the remainder of the file. After this, each line should
contain three items, separated by tabs or spaces; the original atom type name (as used
in the FIELD and CONFIG files), the new name to map to, and finally the element to be
used for this atom type (or D for deuterium). For example:

5
CA	C	C
CB	C	C
HA	HA	H
HB	HB	D
N	N	N

This example states that both carbon types should be considered as equivalent (and just
be named 'C') while all other aom types retain their original names. Note, however, that
'HA' is treated as hydrogen and 'HB' is treated as deuterium. The element symbol may also
be 'X' which indicates a scattering length of zero should be used for this atom type.
The mappings are important since the number and names of the (optional) partial S(Q)
output files (requested with the -partials switch) depends on the number and names of
'remapped' names (second column) in 'lengths.dat'. All names are case-sensitive.

